>We fill the second cup
>Uncover the Matzah, as we begin telling the story of our exodus...


This is the bread of affliction which our fathers did eat in the land of Egypt. Let all who are hungry come in and eat; let all who need come in and celebrate Passover. This year we celebrate it here, may we celebrate it next year in the land of Israel. This year we are in exile, next year may we be free.

>The children now ask the four questions...

why is this night different from all other nights?

>Ma nishtana halayla hazeh mikol haleilot?

On all other nights we do not dip even once, but on this night we do so twice. 

>Shebechol haleilot ain anu matbilin afilu paam echat Halaylah hazeh shtei peamim

	On all other nights we eat either leavened or unleavened bread - Matzah, but on this night exclusively Matzah. 

>Shebechol haleilot anu ochlin chameitz oh matzah, Halylah hazeh kulo Matzah

On all other nights we eat all kinds of vegetables, but on this night, bitter herbs. 

>Shebechol haleilot anu ochlin she-ar yerakot, Halaylah hazeh Maror

			On all other nights we eat either sitting or reclining, but on this night we all lean. 

>Shebechol haleilot anu ochlin bein yoshvin uvein mesubin, Halaylah hazeh kulanu mesubin


We were slaves to Pharaoh in Egypt, and the Lord our G-d brought us out from there with a strong hand and outstretched arm. If the most holy, blessed be He, had not brought out our fathers from Egypt, then we, our children, and our children's children would all be slaves to Pharaoh in Egypt. Now, even would all of us be wise, all of us of great understanding, all of us elders, all of us familiar with the Scripture, it would still be our duty to tell the story of the Exodus from Egypt, and the more we find to say of the Exodus from Egypt, the better.
It happened with Rabbi Eliezer, Rabbi Joshua,  Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah, Rabbi Akivah, and Rabbi Tarfon: they were once dining in Bnei Brak, and were speaking about the Exodus from Egypt all that night until their disciples came and said to them, "Our teachers, the time has come to recite the morning Shema!"
Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah said, "I am like a man of seventy, and I did not appreciate why the story of the exodus from Egypt should be told at night until Ben Zoma explained it thus: "The Torah says, 'That you may remember the day when you came out of the land of Egypt all the days of your life.' Had it said 'The days of your life,' it would have referred only to the daytime. But as it says, 'All the days of your life,' it intends to include the nights. The Sages, however, say, had it said only 'the days of your life,' it would have referred only to this world, but as it says, 'All the days of your life,' it means to include also the days of Moshiach.
Blessed is the Omnipotent! Blessed be He! Blessed is He who gave the Torah to His people Israel! Blessed be He! 

Four times does the Torah refer to the enquiring child... 
This indicates that the Torah thought of four kinds of enquiring children - the wise child, the wicked child, the simple child, and the one that is unable to enquire by himself...

Which is the wise child's question? "What are the 'testimonies and the statutes and the judgments' which the Lord our G-d has commanded you?" you shall answer him by telling him of the laws of Passover, down to the law that no 'afikoman' may follow the Paschal lamb.

Which is the wicked child's question? "What do you mean by this service?" he attributes the service to You, deliberatey excluding himself, rejecting the primary principles of Judaism. Therefore you must retort upon him quoting, "This is done because of that which the Lord did for me when I came out of Egypt." For me, and not for him; if he had been there he would not have been redeemed.

Which is the simple child's question? "What is this?" you shall answer him by saying: "with a strong hand the Lord brought us out from Egypt, from the house of bondage."
	  
If the child cannot engage with a question, you shall open the subject to him, as it is said, "And you shall show your child on that day, saying, This is done because of that which the Lord did for me when I came out of Egypt." 


Should it be from the first of the month [of Nisan]? No: for the Torah says, 'On that day.' Does 'That day' mean the daytime? No: for the Torah continues 'This is done,' It would not have said, 'This is done,' except to refer to the time when the Matzah and bitter herbs are there before you.
In remotest days our ancestors were idolaters, but now G-d has brought us to worship Him, as it is said, 'And Joshua said unto all the people: Thus says the Lord, G-d of Israel, Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the river in old time, including Terach, the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor: and they served other gods.
And I took your father Abraham from the other side of the river, and led him throughout all the land of Canaan, and multiplied his seed and gave him Isaac, And I gave unto Isaac, Jacob and Esau: and I gave unto Esau mount Seir, to possess it; but Jacob and his children went down into Egypt.

> Cover the Matzah and raise your cup of wine

And it is this [same promise] that has been maintained to our forefathers and to us, for there has not been only one to rise up against us to destroy us, but in every generation there arises against us those who would destroy us, and the Holy One (blessed be He) delivers us from their hands.

>Put down the cup of wine, and uncover the Matzah

Inquire and learn what Laban, the Syrian, sought to do to Jacob our father. For while Pharaoh decreed a sentence against the male children, Laban sought to destroy the whole [of the family of Jacob], as it is said, 'A Syrian [Laban] would have caused my father to perish, and he went down to Egypt, and sojourned there with but a few, and became there a great nation, mighty and populous.'
'And he went down into Egypt,' inspired thereto by the word of G-d. 'And he sojourned there.' This teaches that our ancestor Jacob did not go down to Egypt to remain there, but only to sojourn; as it is further said, 'They said moreover unto Pharaoh, Only to sojourn in the land have we come, for your servants have no pasture for their flocks; for the famine is sore in the land of Canaan; now therefore, we ask you, let your servants dwell in the land of Goshen.'
'With but a few,' as it is said, 'Your fathers went down into Egypt with seventy persons; and now the Lord your G-d has made you as the stars of heaven for multitude.'
'...and became there a nation.' This teaches that Israel became distinguished. '...great and mighty,' as it is said, 'And the children of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty, and the land was filled with them.' '...and populous,' as it is said, 'I have caused you to multiply as the bud of the field, and you have increased and waxen great, and you have come to excellent ornaments; your shape is perfected, and your hair is grown, whereas you are naked and bare.'
'And the Egyptians treated us evilly, and  afflicted us and laid upon us hard bondage:' 'And the Egyptians treated us evilly,' as it is said 'Come now, let us handle them [the Jews] wisely; lest they multiply, and it will come to pass that when there falls out any war, they will join also with our enemies and fight against us, and so leave out of our land.' '...and afflicted us,' as it is said, 'Therefore they set taskmasters in charge of them to afflict them with their burdens,  and they built for Pharaoh warehouse cities (Pithom and Rameses).' '...and laid upon us hard bondage,' as it is said, 'And the Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with rigor [...] and they embittered their lives with hard bondage, with bricks and mortar, and with all sorts of work in the field, all their work which they served with rigor.'
'And when we cried unto the Lord, G-d of our fathers, the Lord heard our voice and looked on our affliction and our labor and our oppression.' 'And when we cried unto the Lord, G-d of our fathers,' as it is said, 'And it came to pass in course of time that the king of Egypt died; and the children of Israel sighed from their bondage, and they cried, and their cry came up to G-d from their bondage.'
'The Lord heard our voice,' as it is said, 'And G-d heard their groaning, and G-d remembered His covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob.'
'And He saw our affliction.' This refers to Egyptian tyranny over Jewish family life; as it is said, 'And G-d looked upon the children of Israel, and G-d understood.'
'And our labor.' This refers to the condemned male children, as it is said, 'Every son that is born you shall cast into the river, and every daughter you shall save alive.' '...and our oppression.' This refers to its severity, as it is said, 'And I have also seen the oppression with which the Egyptians oppressed them.'
'And the Lord brought us forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with great terribleness, and with signs and wonders.' 'And the Lord brought us forth out of Egypt.' Not by the hands of an angel, nor by the hands of a seraph, nor by the hands of a messenger; but it was the Holy One, blessed be He, He Himself, as it is said, 'For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night, and will smite all the first-born in the land of Egypt, both man and beast; and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment; I am the Lord.' 'For I will pass through the land of Egypt,' i.e., I, myself, and not an angel; '...and I will smite all the first-born,' I, myself, and not a seraph; '...and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment,' I, Myself, and not a messenger.' I am the Lord; it is I and no other.
'With a mighty hand.' This refers to the pestilence, as it is said, 'Behold the hand of the Lord is upon your cattle which is in the field, upon the horses, upon the donkeys, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and upon the sheep. There shall be a very grievous pestilence.' '...and with an outstretched arm.' This refers to the sword, of which it is said, 'Having a drawn sword in His hand stretched out over Jerusalem.' '...and with great terribleness.' This refers to the revelation by G-d of His divine presence, as it is said, 'Or has G-d assayed to go and take Him a nation from the midst of another nation, by temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty hand and by a stretched out arm, and by great terrors, according to all that the Lord your G-d did for you in Egypt before your eyes.'
'And with signs.' This refers to the rod (of Moses), as it is said, 'And you shall take this rod in your hand wherewith you shall do signs.' '...and with wonders.' This refers to the blood, as it is said, 'And I will show wonders in the heavens and in the earth,

>Pour three times from your cup of wine into a broken dish, as we say:

Blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke.'
Another explanation is, that these  expressions: 'A mighty hand,' indicates two plagues, 'An outstretched arm,' another two plagues, 'Great terribleness,' another two plagues, 'Signs’ another two plagues, and 'Wonders' another two.
These are the ten plagues which the Holy One, blessed be He, did bring upon the Egyptians in Egypt, namely:

>For each plague, pour from your cup into a broken dish

Blood, frogs, lice, wild animals, pestilence, boils, hail, locusts, darkness, the slaying of the first-born
Rabbi Judah made acronyms for them:

>Pour three times from your cup of wine into a broken dish, as we say:

'Datzach, Adash, Be'achav.'
Rabbi Jose of the Galilee said: From where  do we know that while the Egyptians suffered ten plagues in Egypt, they were at the Red Sea smitten with fifty plagues? Regarding Egypt it is said, 'Then the magicians said unto Pharaoh, This is the finger of G-d.' While regarding the Red Sea it is said, 'And Israel saw that great hand with which the Lord wrought against Egypt, and the people feared the Lord, and believed in the Lord and in His servant Moses.' Now, if with the finger of G-d they were smitten with ten plagues, then we may say that in Egypt they were smitten with ten plagues and at the Red Sea they were smitten with fifty plagues.
Rabbi Eliezer said, From where can we tell  that each plague that the Holy One, blessed be He, brought upon the Egyptians in Egypt was the equivalent of four plagues? For it is said, ‘He cast upon them the fierceness of His anger, wrath, and indignation, and trouble, sending evil angels among them.’ Now ‘wrath’ indicates one plague, ‘indignation’ a second, ‘trouble’ a third, and ‘sending evil angels’ a fourth; hence we may say that in Egypt they were smitten with plagues equal to forty, while at the Red Sea they were smitten with plagues equal to two hundred.
Rabbi Akiva said, From where may we say  that each plague that the Holy One, blessed be He, brought upon the Egyptians in Egypt was equal to five plagues? For it is said, ‘He cast upon them the fierceness of His anger, wrath, and indignation, and trouble, sending evil angels.’ The ‘fierceness of His anger’ is one, ‘wrath’ is a second, ‘indignation’ is a third, ‘trouble’ is a fourth, and ‘sending evil angels’ is a fifth. Hence we may say, that in Egypt they were smitten with plagues equal to fifty, while at the Red Sea they were smitten with plagues equal to two hundred and fifty.
How many are the benefits which G-d has conferred upon us
Had He brought us from Egypt, and had not executed judgments upon the Egyptians: It would have sufficed for our gratitude.
Had He executed judgments upon the Egyptians, and had not then executed judgments upon their gods: It would have sufficed for our gratitude.
Had He executed judgments upon their gods, and had not slain their first-born: It would have sufficed for our gratitude.
Had He slain their first-born, and had not then given us their wealth: It would have sufficed for our gratitude.
Had He given us their wealth, and had not then split the Sea: It would have sufficed for our gratitude.
Had He split the Sea for us, and had not then made us to pass through its midst on dry land: It would have sufficed for our gratitude.
Had He made us to pass through its midst on dry land, and had not sunk our adversaries in the midst thereof: It would have sufficed for our gratitude.
Had He sunk our adversaries in the midst thereof, and had not provided for our needs in the desert for forty years: It would have sufficed for our gratitude.
Had He provided for our needs in the desert for forty years, and had not fed us with the manna: It would have sufficed for our gratitude.
Had He fed us with the manna, and had not given us the Shabbat: It would have sufficed for our gratitude.
Had He given us the Shabbat, and had not brought us to Mount Sinai: It would have sufficed for our gratitude.
Had He brought us to Mount Sinai, and had not given us the Torah: It would have sufficed for our gratitude.
Had He given us the Torah, and had not brought us to the Land of Israel: It would have sufficed for our gratitude.
Had He brought us to the Land of Israel, and had not built for us the Holy Temple: It would have sufficed for our gratitude.
How much, therefore, has the goodness of the Almighty been doubled and redoubled towards us! For He brought us from Egypt; He executed judgments upon the Egyptians; He executed judgments upon their gods; He slew their first-born; He gave us their wealth; He split for us the Sea; He made us to pass through its midst on dry land; He sunk our adversaries in the midst thereof; He provided for our needs in the desert for forty years; He fed us with the manna; He gave us the Shabbat; He brought us to Mount Sinai; He gave us the Torah; He brought us to the Land of Israel; He built for us the Temple in which we atoned for our iniquities.
Rabban Gamaliel said, Whoever does not discuss these three items on the Passover has not fulfilled his duty, and these are they: The Passover offering; the Matzah (unleavened bread); the Maror (bitter herbs).
What is the reason for the sacrifice of the Passover offering which our fathers ate in the time of the Temple? For the Holy One, blessed be He, passed over the houses of our ancestors in Egypt, as it is said, ‘You shall say it is the sacrifice of the Lord’s Passover, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt when He smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. And the people bowed the head and worshiped.

>Hold the Matzah

This Matzah (unleavened bread) Which  we now eat: Why is this eaten? Since the dough of our ancestors had not time to rise before the Supreme King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be He, appeared to them and redeemed them, as it is said, ‘And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought forth from Egypt, for it did not rise, because they were thrust out of Egypt and could not wait, nor had they prepared for themselves any provisions.’

>Hold the Maror

This Maror (bitter herbs) which we now  eat: What does it mean? It is eaten because the Egyptians embittered the lives of our forefathers in Egypt, as it is said, ‘And they made their lives bitter with hard bondage, with mortar and with bricks, and with all types of work in the field; all their work wherein they made them serve was with rigor.’
In every generation each one of us should regard himself as though he himself has gone out from Egypt, as it is said, ‘And you shall show your child on that day, saying, “This is done because of that which the Lord did for me when I came out of Egypt.” Not our ancestors alone did G-d redeem then, but He redeemed us with them, as it is said, ‘And He brought us out from there, that He might bring us in to give us the land which He swore unto our fathers.’

>Cover the Matzah and raise your cup

Therefore we are obliged to thank, to praise, to glorify, to exalt, to honor, to bless, to extol, and to give reverence to Him who performed for us, as well as for our forefathers, all these wonders. He has brought us forth from bondage to freedom, from sorrow to joy, from mourning to festival, from darkness to great light, and from slavery to redemption. Now, therefore, let us sing before Him a new song, Praise G-d!
Praise the lord. Praise, O servants of the Lord, praise the Name of the Lord. Blessed be the Name of the Lord from this time forth and forever more. From the rising of the sun until the sunset, the Lord’s Name is to be praised. The Lord is high above all nations, and His glory above the heavens. Who is like unto the Lord our G-d, that has His seat on high, that humbles himself to behold the things that are in heaven and in the earth? He raises up the poor out of the dust and lifts up the needy from the dunghill; that He may set them with princes, with the princes of His people. He makes the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of children. Praise the Lord.
When Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of a strange language; Judah became His sanctuary, Israel His dominion. The sea saw it and fled; Jordan was driven back. The mountains skipped like rams, the little hills like young sheep. What ails you, O sea, that you flee? Jordan, that you turn back? Mountains, that you skip like rams; you little hills like young sheep? Tremble, you earth, at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the G-d of Jacob; which turned the rock into a pool of water, the flint into a fountain of water.
Blessed are You, Lord our G-d, King of the Universe, who redeemed us and our ancestors from Egypt, and has brought us to this night to eat thereon Matzah and Maror. So, Lord our G-d, the G-d of our fathers, may You enable us to reach other festivals and holidays in future, with gladness at the rebuilding of Your city and with joy in Your service, there (in Jerusalem rebuilt) may we partake of the sacrifices and of the Passover offerings (of the Passover offerings and the sacrifices) offered upon your altar, in your favor, when we will offer to you a new song for our redemption and our salvation. Blessed are You, Lord, redeemer of Israel.