A Song of Ascents. When the Lord returns Zion from captivity, we will have been as if in a dream. Then our mouth will be filled with laughter, and our tongue with exultation: then they'll say among the nations, The Lord has done great things for them. The Lord has done great things for us, we are glad. Bring back our captivity, Lord, as the streams in the south. They who sow in tears shall reap in joy. Though he goes on his way weeping, bearing the store of seed, he shall come back with joy, bearing his sheaves,

Let us say Grace.

>The others answer, and the leader repeats:

Blessed be the Name of the Lord from this time forth and forever.

With the sanction of those present: We will bless Him of whose bounty we have eaten.

>The others answer, and the leader repeats:

Blessed be He of whose bounty we have eaten, and through whose goodness we live.

Blessed are You, Lord our G-d, King of the universe, who feeds the whole world with your goodness, with grace, with loving-kindness and with tender mercy; He gives food to all flesh, for His loving-kindness endures forever, and through His great goodness toward us, food has never failed us, nor will it fail us forever and ever, for His great Name's sake, since He, G-d nourishes and sustains all beings, and does good unto all, and provides food for all His creatures which He has created. Blessed are You, Lord, who gives food unto all.

We thank You, Lord our G-d, for Youdid give as an inheritance unto our fathers a desirable, good, and ample land, and for You did bring us forth, Lord our G-d, from the land of Egypt, and did deliver us from the house of bondage; as well for Your covenant which You have sealed in our flesh; as well as for Your Torah which You have taught us; Your statutes which You have made known unto us; the life, grace, and loving-kindness which You have bestowed upon us; and for the food wherewith You do constantly feed and sustain us every day, in every time, at every hour.

For all this, Lord our G-d, we thank You and  bless You. Blessed be Your Name by the mouth of all life continually, forever. As it is written, And you shall eat and be satisfied, and you shall bless the Lord your G-d for the good land which He has given you. Blessed are You, Lord, for the land and for the food.

Have mercy, Lord our G-d, upon Israel Your people, and upon Jerusalem Your city, upon Zion the abiding place of Your glory, upon the kingdom of the house of David Your anointed, and upon the great and holy house called by Your Name. O our G-d, our Father, tend to us, nourish us, sustain us, support us, relieve us, and speedily, Lord our G-d, grant us relief from all our troubles. We beseech You, Lord our G-d, let us not be in need neither of the gifts from people of flesh and blood, nor of their loans, rather only of Your hand, which is full, open, holy, and ample; that we may not be ashamed nor confounded forever and ever.

>On Shabbat add

Be pleased, Lord our G-d, to fortify us by Your commandments, and by the commandment of the seventh day, this great and holy Shabbat, since this day is great and holy before You, that we may rest and repose then in love, according to the commandment, Your will. With Your favor, Lord our G-d, grant us such repose that there be no trouble, grief, or lamenting on the day of our rest. Let us, Lord our G-d, behold the consolation of Zion Your city, and the rebuilding of Jerusalem Your holy city, for You are the master of salvation and of consolation.

Our G-d, G-d of our fathers: May there rise, and come, and reach, and be seen, and accepted, and heard, and addressed, and remembered, our remembrance and our redemption, with the remembrance of our fathers, of Moshiach the son of David Your servant, of Jerusalem Your holy city, and of all Your people the house of Israel, before You, bringing deliverance and well-being. Bringing grace, loving-kindness, mercy, good life, and peace on this day of the Passover, this holiday. Remember us, Lord our G-d, thereon, for our wellbeing; be mindful of us for blessing; and save us unto good life; by Your promise of salvation and mercy, spare us and be gracious unto us, have mercy upon us, and save us, for our eyes are bent upon You, for You are the gracious and merciful G-d and King. 

And rebuild Jerusalem the holy city speedily in our days. Blessed are You, Lord, who in His compassion rebuilds Jerusalem. Amen.

Blessed are You, Lord our G-d, King of the universe; O G-d, our Father, our King, our Mighty One, our Creator, our Redeemer, our Maker, our Holy One, the Holy One of Jacob, our Shepherd, the Shepherd of Israel, O King, who is kind and deals kindly with all, day by day He has dealt kindly, does deal kindly, and will deal kindly with us, He has bestowed, He does bestow, He will forever bestow benefits upon us, yielding us grace, loving-kindness, and mercy, and relief, deliverance, and prosperity, blessing and salvation, consolation, sustenance, and support, mercy, life, peace, and all good, of no manner of good will He let us be in want.

The All-merciful shall reign over us forever and ever. The All-merciful shall be blessed in heaven and on earth. The All-merciful shall be praised throughout all generations, glorified in us forever and for all eternity, and honored in us forever, everlasting. May the All-merciful grant us an honorable livelihood. May the All-merciful break off the yoke of exile from our neck, and lead us upright to our land. May the All-merciful send a plentiful blessing upon this house and upon this table at which we have eaten. May the All-merciful send us Elijah the prophet (let him be remembered for good), who shall give us good tidings, salvation and consolation. May the All-merciful bless my honored father, the master of this house, and my honored mother, the mistress of this house, they, their household, their children, and all that is theirs; us and all that is ours, as our fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were blessed with everything, from everything, comprehensively; so may He bless all of us together (children of the covenant) with a perfect blessing, and let us say, Amen. Both on their and on our behalf may there be such advocacy on high as shall lead to enduring peace; and may we receive a blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the G-d of our salvation; and may we find grace and good understanding in the sight of G-d and man.

>On Shabbat add

May the All-merciful let us inherit the day which shall be wholly a Shabbat and rest in the life everlasting.

May the All-merciful let us inherit the day which is altogether good. May the All-merciful let us merit the days of Moshiach and the life of the world to come. He is a tower of salvation to His king, and shows loving-kindness to His anointed, to David and to his seed, for evermore. He who makes peace in His high places, may He make peace for us and for all Israel, and say, Amen.

Fear the Lord, His holy ones, for there is no want to them that fear Him. Young lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good. Give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good, for His loving-kindness endures forever. You open Your hand, and satisfy every living thing with favor. Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose trust the Lord is.