>We fill the fourth cup and also the cup of Elija. The door is opened as we say:

Pour out Your wrath upon the nations who know You not, and upon kingdoms which call not upon Your Name. They have consumed Jacob, and they have desolated His dwelling. Pour out upon them Your indignation; let the fierceness of Your anger overtake them. Pursue them in anger, and destroy them from under the heavens of the Lord.
Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, but unto Your Name give glory, for Your mercy, and for Your truth's sake. Why should the nations say, Where then is their G-d? And our G-d is in the heavens: He does whatsoever He pleases. Their idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands. They have mouths, but they don't speak; they have eyes, but they don't see; they have ears, but they don't hear; they have noses, but they don't smell; they have hands, but they don't touch; they have feet, but they don't walk; they don't speak through their throat. They that make them shall be like them, everyone that trusts in them. Israel trusts in the Lord: He is their help and their shield. The house of Aaron trusts in the Lord: He is their help and their shield. Those who fear the Lord, trust in the Lord: He is their help and their shield.
I love the Lord, because He has heard my voice, my supplications. Because He has turned His ear to me, and I will  call upon Him as long as I live. The cords of death compassed me, and the pains of Sheol got hold upon me; I found trouble and sorrow. Then I called upon the Name of the Lord; Lord, I beseech You, deliver my soul. Gracious is the Lord, and righteous; our G-d is merciful. The Lord protects the simple: I was brought low and He saved me. Return unto your rest, my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with you. For You have delivered my soul from death, my eyes from tears, my feet from falling. I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living. I believe, for I will speak: I was greatly afflicted: I said in my haste, All men are a lie.
What shall I respond to the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord, in the presence of all His people. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His pious ones. I thank you, Lord, for I am Your servant: I am Your servant the son of Your handmaid; You have loosened my bonds. I will offer to You a sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call upon the Name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord, in the presence of all His people; in the courts of the Lord's house, in your midst, O Jerusalem, praise the Lord.
O praise the Lord, all nations: laud Him all peoples. For His mercy is great toward us; and the truth of the Lord is forever. Praise the Lord.
O give thanks unto the Lord; for He is good: for His mercy endures forever. Let Israel say: That His mercy endures forever. Let the house of Aaron say: That His mercy endures forever. Let those who fear the Lord say: That His mercy endures forever.
In my constraint I called upon the Lord: the Lord answered me in abundance. The Lord is on my side; I will not fear: what can man do to me? The Lord is on my side among them that help me: therefore shall I face my enemies. It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in man. It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in princes. All nations encompassed: in the Name of the Lord I will cut them off. They surrounded me, encompassed me: in the Name of the Lord I will cut them off. They surrounded me like bees; they are quenched as the fire of thorns: in the Name of the Lord I will cut them off. You pushed me that I might fall: but the Lord helped me. The strength and vengeance of our Lord has become my salvation. The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tents of the righteous: the right hand of the Lord acts valiantly. The right hand of the Lord is exalted: the right hand of the Lord acts valiantly. I shall not die, rather live, and declare the works of the Lord. The Lord has chastened me sore, but He has not given me over unto death. Open to me the gates of righteousness, I will enter into them, I will give thanks unto the Lord. This is the gate of the Lord, the righteous shall enter into it.
I will give thanks unto You, for You have answered me, and have become my salvation. (Repeat this verse.) The stone which the builders rejected has become the cornerstone. (Repeat.) This is the Lord’s doing; it is marvelous in our eyes. (Repeat.) This is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it. (Repeat.)
We beseech You, Lord: save us, please. We beseech You, Lord: save us, please. We beseech You, Lord: grant success please. We beseech You, Lord: grant success please.
Blessed be he that comes in the Name of the Lord: we have blessed you out of the house of the Lord. (Repeat.) The Lord is G-d, and He has given us light; bind the sacrifice with cords, even unto the horns of the altar. (Repeat.) You are my G-d, and I will give thanks unto You: You are my G-d, I will exalt You. (Repeat.) Give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good, for His mercy endures forever. (Repeat.)

Let all Your works praise You Lord, our G-d. And let the righteous, who do Your will and all Your people the house of Israel, joyfully praise, bless, laud, glorify, exalt, reverence, declare holy and ascribe royalty to Your Name, our King. For to You it is right to give thanks, and to Your Name it is fitting to sing, for from everlasting unto everlasting You are G-d.
O give thanks unto the Lord; for He is good: For His mercy endures forever. O give thanks unto the G-d of gods: For His mercy endures forever. O give thanks unto the Lord of lords: For His mercy endures forever. To Him who alone does great wonders: For His mercy endures forever. To Him that through understanding made the heavens: For His mercy endures forever. To Him that spread forth the earth over the waters: For His mercy endures forever. To Him that made great lights: For His mercy endures forever. The sun to rule by day: For His mercy endures forever. The moon and stars to rule by night: For His mercy endures forever. To Him that smote Egypt in their first-born: For His mercy endures forever. And brought out Israel from among them: For His mercy endures forever. With a strong hand and with an outstretched arm: For His mercy endures forever. To him which divided the Red Sea apart: For His mercy endures forever. And made Israel to pass through the midst of it: For His mercy endures forever. And overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea: For His mercy endures forever. To Him which led His people through the wilderness: For His mercy endures forever. To Him which smote great kings: For His mercy endures forever. And slew famous kings: For His mercy endures forever. Sihon king of the Amorites: For His mercy endures forever. And Og king of Bashan: For His mercy endures forever. And gave their land for an inheritance: For His mercy endures forever. An inheritance unto Israel His servant: For His mercy endures forever. He gives food to all flesh: For His mercy endures forever. O give thanks to the G-d of heaven: For His mercy endures forever.
The breath of every living being shall bless Your Name, Lord our G-d, and the spirit of all flesh shall continually glorify and exalt Your memorial, O our King; from everlasting to everlasting You are G-d; and beside You we have no King who redeems and saves, sets free and delivers, and who supports and answers and has mercy in all times of trouble and distress; we have no King but You. He is G-d of the first and of the last, the G-d of all creatures, the Lord of all generations, who is extolled with many praises, and guides His world with loving-kindness and His creatures with tender mercies. The Lord neither slumbers, nor sleeps; He arouses the sleepers and awakens the slumberers; He makes the dumb to speak, loosens the bound, supports the falling, and raises up the bowed. To You alone we give thanks. Though our mouths were full of song as the sea, and our tongues of exultation as the multitude of its waves, and our lips of praise as the expanses of the cosmos; though our eyes shone like the sun and the moon, and our hands were spread forth like the eagles of heaven, and our feet were swift as deer, we should still be unable to thank You, Lord our G-d and G-d of our fathers, and to bless Your Name for one of the thousands of thousands upon thousands, myriad leagues of events, the favors, miracles and wonders which You have done for us and for our fathers before us. You redeemed us from Egypt, Lord our G-d, and released us from the house of bondage; during famine You fed us, and in plenty You sustained us; from the sword You did rescue us, from pestilence You did save us, and from sore and lasting diseases You delivered us. Thus far Your tender mercy has helped us, and Your loving-kindness has not left us: forsake us not, Lord our G-d, forever. Therefore the limbs which You have put within us, and the spirit and soul which You have breathed into our nostrils, and the tongue which You have set in our mouths: they shall thank, bless, praise, glorify, extol, reverence, make holy, and assign kingship to Your Name our King. For every mouth shall give thanks unto You, and every tongue shall swear unto You; every knee shall bow to You, and whatsoever is lofty shall prostrate itself before You; all hearts shall fear You, and all the inward parts shall sing unto Your Name, as it is written, All my bones shall say, Lord, who is like You? You deliver the poor from him that is too strong for him, the poor and the needy from him that robs them. Who can be likened to You, who can be equated to You, who can be compared to You, G-d, the great, mighty, and awful, most high G-d, Possessor of heaven and earth. We will praise, laud, and glorify You, and we will bless Your holy Name, as it is said (A Psalm of David), Bless the Lord, O my soul; and all that is within me, bless His holy Name.
The G-d in the incredibleness of Your power, the great One in the glory of Your Name, the mighty One forever and the Awesome One by Your awesome acts. The King who sits upon a high and lofty throne.
He who dwells in eternity, exalted and holy is His Name; and it is written, Exult in the Lord, O you righteous; praise is seemly for the just. By the mouth of the just You shall be praised, by the words of the righteous You shall be blessed, by the tongues of the devoted ones You shall be extolled, and in the midst of the holy You shall be praised. In the assemblies also of the multitudes of Your people, the house of Israel, Your Name, our King, shall be glorified with joyous cries in every generation; for such is the duty of all creatures in Your presence, Lord our G-d, G-d of our fathers, to thank, praise, laud, glorify, extol, honor, bless, exalt, and adore, beyond all the words of song and praise of David the son of Yishai, Your servant and anointed.
And so praised be Your Name forever, our King, the Almighty, the King,  the Great, the Holy in heaven and on earth; for to You, is becoming, Lord our G-d, G-d of our fathers, song and praise, hymn and psalm, strength and dominion, victory, greatness, and might, renown and glory, holiness and sovereignty, blessings and thanksgivings for Your great and holy Name; forever and ever your are Almighty G-d. Blessed are You, Lord, Almighty G-d, King, great and renowned in praises, G-d of thanksgivings, master of wonders, Creator of all souls orchestrator of all events, who chooses song and hymn: one and only King, the life of all worlds.


>The concluding blessing for wine and grape juice:
Blessed are You, Lord our G-d, King of the Universe, for the vine and for the fruit of the vine, for the produce of the field, and for the pleasant, goodly and great land in which You did delight, and which You did grant as the inheritance of our forefathers, to eat its fruit, and be satiated with its bounties. Be merciful, please, Lord our G-d, to Israel Your people; to Jerusalem, Your city; to Zion, the dwelling place of Your honor; to Your altar and to Your sanctuary. And rebuild Jerusalem, Your holy city, speedily in our days. And bring us there, let us rejoice in it. And may we there be enabled to offer You pure and sanctified blessing (be pleased to grant us strength on this Shabbat day), and remember us for goodness on this holiday of Passover, for You, Lord, are good and benevolent to all. Then shall we render You thanks for the land and for the fruit of the vine. Blessed are You, Lord, for the land and for the fruit of the vine.
>The concluding blessing for other drinks:
Blessed are You, Lord our G-d, Creator of so many diverse beings, for all You have created, and through which you maintain the soul of all life, Blessed is He, the Life of all worlds.


Next Year in Jerusalem!

